Quick Rules:

Character Creation:
There are three ways to build a character:
  1) Use the recommended stats.
  2) Pick your own CLASS stats: 
    a) All stats except for luck and vitality begin at -3
    b) You have 15 points to spend).
  3) Roll your own CLASS stats. 
    a) All stats begin at -7 exceptt for luck and vitality which begin at -1.
    b) For all stats but luck and vitality, roll 1d12.
    c) For luck and vitality, roll 1d4.
    d) Roll 1d4 and add that many points across your stats.
  4) NOTE: If you pick or roll stats, race stats still stay as written, and are added to class stats.

Leveling Up: 
When you level up, do the following:
  1) Gain your new abilities per the level up guide.
  2) Either 
    a) add 2 stat points to the stats of your choice 
    OR b) Take the recommended stat increase.
    OR c) Take a skill, and don't take a stat increase.
  3) At levels 0, 5, and 10, players get a free skill.
  4) Add the following to your health:
    a) Your vitality
    b) Your new level
    c) A roll of your health dice
    So if a characters had 10 health, 4 vitality, was leveling up to level 3, and had a health dice of 12, they would:
      a) Add their vitality (10 + 4 = 14)
      b) Add their new level (14 + 3 = 17)
      c) Add a roll of their health dice -- lets say they roll a 5. (17+5 = 22)
      d) So their final health would be 22

Stats:
  1) Stats of -3 to 3 work linearly. That is, if you have 1 STR, you add 1 to a strength check.
  2) Stats beyond that are affected by diminishing returns, and are worth HALF AS MUCH and are ROUNDED TOWARDS ZERO.
  3) We call this number your EFFECTIVE stat (e.g. effective strength).
    a) Therefore, if you have 4 STR, you add 3 to a strength check (3.5 rounded towards zero.)
    b) If you have 5 STR you add 4 to strength checks (4 rounded towards zer).
    c) If you have 1 STR, you add 1 to a strength check.
    d) If you have -1 STR, you add -1 to a strength check.
    e) If you have -4 STR, you add -3 to a strength check.
    f) If you have -5 STR, you add -4 to a strength check.
  4) The stats are as follows:
    STRENGTH: 
      a) Added to strength based attacks (sword, axe, maul).
      b) Added to strength checks. (lifting something)
      c) You max armor can at most be equal to your effective strength.
    DEXTERITY
      a) Added to dexterity based attacks (bow and arrow, scimitar, dagger) 
      b) Added to dexterity checks (jumping across a ravine)
      c) Dexterity is added to initiative
    INNER FIRE
      a) Added to spell damage.
      b) Used to resist of spells.
      c) Determines spell strength SPELL POWER = 10 + (2*INF)
    INTELLIGENCE
      a) Added to intelligence checks
      b) Determines a characters number of spell points, which can be used to use abilities spell points = 5 + INT
    CHARISMA
      a) Used for charisma checks (trying to convince someone of something)
      b) Used by sorcerers for charisma based spellcasting
    PERCEPTION
      a) Used for perception checks (looking for signs of passage)
    VITALITY
      a) Helps determine overall health
    LUCK
      a) Characters have "Luck Tokens" equal to their luck.
        i) These can be used to re-do any roll, and re-fill after a long rest.

Example Checks:
  a) Lifting a rock: Strength check
  b) Picking a lock: Dexterity check
  c) Resisting a spell: Inner Fire Check
  d) Trying to decipher a codex: Intelligence Check
  e) Trying to woo a guard: Charisma Check
  f) Passively noticing strange tracks on the ground: Perception Check

Advantage, Disadvantage, and Inspiration:
  1) Advantage: Roll twice and take the better.
  2) Disadvantage: Roll twice and take the worse.
  3) Inspiration: If inspired, add an inspiration dice to a roll of your choice AFTER ROLLING.

Healing:
  1) REST
    a) Resting (not sleeping) restores 2d6 health and 2 spell points.
    b) Camping (no real bed) restores 4d10 health and 5 spell points.
    c) Sleeping in a bed restores 4d20 health and all spell points.
  2) Eating: 
    a) By default eating only restores 1d4 health unless the item is magic.
    b) There are skills that allow players to cook better food for healing.
  3) Potions
    a) Potions can be used to heal. 
    RECOMMENDED POTIONS:
      Level 0-3: 1d6, 1d10, 2d6
      Level 4-6: 2d10, 3d12, 4d20
      Level 7-10: 2d20, 3d20, 4d20

Weapons:
  1) Weapons have two parts:
    a) Base damage, which consists of a single dice (e.g a 1d8 sword)
    b) Effect damage, which can consist of multiple dice (e.g. fire effect, which deals 2d6 damage).
    c) This would result in a 1d8 sword which does + 2d6 fire damage.
  2) If the base attack is a critical hit (e.g if the character rolls an 8 on their 1d8 sword) all damage is doubled.

Example Status Effects:
  1) Light Damage: does double damage to undead/evil entities.
  2) Fire damage: Force an entity to make a spell power save or be burned and take more damage on the start of its next turn.
  3) Frost/Ice damage: Force an entity to make a spell power save or be pushed back 1d4 turns spots in initiative.
  4) Lightning damage: Force an entity to make a spell power save or loose an action.
  6) Poison damage: Force an entity to make a spell power save or take more damage on its next turn.

NOTE: At levels 5 and 7, characters tend to get an extra attack EFFECTIVELY DOUBLING THEIR DAMAGE.
  To that end, BE CAREFUL HOW MUCH FIREPOWER YOU GIVE THEM.

Example Weapons by Level:
  1) Level 0-2: 1d6 weapon is ok, 1d8 is good. Some 1d4 effects.
  2) Level 2-5: 1d8 weapon is ok, 1d10 is good. Some 1d6 effects.
  3) Level 6-7: 1d10 is ok, 1d12 is good. Some 2d6 and 2d8 effects.
  4) Level 8-10: 1d12 weapons are the norm. Some 4d6, 2d10 effects. 

Enemies (Work in progress)
  1) It has generally been agreed upon that some enemies are high level:
    a) An ancient dragon is a level 7+ enemy
    b) An ancient kraken is a level 7+ enemy.
  2) This is because we want some enemies to FEEL epic. We rob players of their experience if we have
    them fight a 20 health kraken at level 0.
  3) To get around this, if you DO want a dragon to fight your level 2 party, use a young dragon or a drake. (It will still be plenty scary).
  4) We're not perfect at developing enemies yet, here are a few rules of thumb:
    a) Depending on party size, minions can be very important (especially when using a battle map)
      i) Without minions, the party will surround the enemy and smack it repeatedly, which will get boring.
    b) Enemies should do a little bit more damage than you think. Remember, if their are 5 members of your party
      and they each have 30 health and do 1d6 damage, they collectively have 150 health and do ~5d6 damage per turn
      before critical hits.
    c) BOSS ACTIONS: Boss monsters are allowed to make up to 3 moves out of turn during a fight. This helps them to do more
      damage and to move around more.
  5) DON'T FORGET THE ABILILITIES
    a) Monsters are more fun when they have crazy abilities. Have them huck fireballs, heal teammates, try to put people to sleep, etc.

NOTE: As a rule of thumb, players have (level+1) * 10 health. So at level 0, the average player has about 10 health. At level 5, about 50, etc.
(This is only a general rule. A Barbarian Knight can have upwards of 200 health by level 10).

Combat:
  1) An "Action" is an entities ability to do something, including attack, cast a spell, take a potion, etc.
  2) An "Offhand Action" is an entities ability to do something small. This does NOT include attacking and spellcasting, but does include taking potions.
    a) Some classes will get the "Offhand Attack" ability at level 3, 4, or 5, which allows them to attack as an offhand action.
    b) Some classes get the "Offhand Spell" ability, which allows them to cast low level spells as an offhand action.
    c) Some classes will get a second action at level 7.
  3) A "Reaction" can be done out of turn as a response to someone else's action or offhand action.
    a) For example, counterattack is an ability which lets an entity attack back once per turn when they are attacked.
    b) An entity can use at most one Reaction per turn.
  4) Combat in Rangers and Ruffians 2.1 is Turn Based.
    a) To establish an order, combatants roll initiative, which is a d20 plus their effective dexterity.
    b) If two combatants roll the same initiative, they can decide amongst themselves who goes first or roll again.
    c) On a turn, characters can do the following in any order:
      i) Perform any actions that they have.
      ii) Perform any offhand actions that they have.
      iii) Move 25 feet
  5) Characters can choose to "Hold their Turn", effectively pushing themselves back in the initiative order.

Attacking:
  1) wip

LOOT:
  1) DECIDE EARLY HOW MUCH LOOT YOU WANT TO HAND OUT.
  2) REMEMBER: Abilities can be just as fun as high stat weapons.
  3) REMEMBER: Just because a player wants something doesn't mean they get it right away.
  4) In Rangers and Ruffians 2.1, Mages and Casters automatically gain spells on level up.
    i) This gives you one less thing to keep track of.
    ii) You can still give them spellbooks if you want.

Timing a play session:
  1) 5 encounters take roughly 3-4 hours depending on party size.
    i) For example, Getting to a dungeon, fighting an encounter, solving a puzzle, exploring a trapped room, and fighting a boss might take 3-4 hours.
    ii) You will almost certainly design too much content for a session.
    iii) Read the room near the end of an over-long session. DON'T KEEP PLAYING IF INTEREST IS FLAGGING.

Building a Complex Town:
Answer these questions:
  1) Who is in charge.
  2) Why are they in charge. 
  3) Who else wants to be in charge.
  4) What business thrives in this town if any?
  5) How do the people of the town like it there?
  6) Are there any guilds in the town?
  7) What about churches?
  8) How can the quest that you have in mind tie in to one of the power structures in the town?
  9) Now that it's tied in, how do the other power structures react
  10) What is going on in the country around the town? How does it affect the town inhabitants?
  11) What do the people of the town want? How does this feed into your story.

Gods:
  Read the pantheon.yml file to learn about the deities of Rangers and Ruffians 2.1

Weird Rules to Remember:
  1) Automaton can't heal with potions.
  2) Necromancers have to keep eating souls every few days (unless they're vegan).
  3) Deep Elves are harmed by the light.
  4) Waterborn need to sleep in water every few days.